UnityCatalog-ai docs (#625)
unitycatalog/unitycatalog: docs/ucai/index.md

# Welcome to the Unity Catalog AI documentation

## Defining a Client

To interact with Unity Catalog (UC) functions, you must define and initialize a client that manages communication between your application and the UC service. The `DatabricksFunctionClient` provided in the Unity Catalog AI Core Library is designed to facilitate this interaction seamlessly.

### Client initialization

Here is how to initialize a client for connecting to a managed Databricks Unity Catalog:

``` python
from ucai.core.databricks import DatabricksFunctionClient

client = DatabricksFunctionClient(warehouse_id="YOUR_WAREHOUSE_ID")

CATALOG = "my_catalog"
SCHEMA = "my_schema"
```

If you decide to run operations using serverless runtime on Databricks, you do not need to define a `warehouse_id` when creating the client.

#### Gotchas and Best Practices for the Client

> - **Warehouse ID Accuracy**

Reviewer: Do you think table is better here for displaying?

Author: yep!

    - Pitfall: Providing an incorrect warehouse_id can lead to authentication failures or inability to execute functions.

>     - Solution: Double-check the warehouse_id obtained from your Databricks workspace. Ensure that the warehouse is active and supports serverless compute if required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Solution: Double-check the warehouse_id obtained from your Databricks workspace. Ensure that the warehouse is active and of type `serverless`.
```

- **Databricks SDK Installation**

    - Pitfall: Missing or outdated databricks-sdk can prevent the client from functioning correctly.
    - Solution: Ensure that you have installed the databricks-sdk as specified in the Prerequisites section. Keep it updated to the latest version to benefit from recent fixes and features.

- **Profile Configuration**

    - Pitfall: Incorrect profile settings can result in connection issues.
    - Solution: If you're using multiple profiles, specify the correct one during client initialization. Ensure that the profile has the necessary permissions to interact with the Unity Catalog.

- **Dependency Management**

    - Pitfall: Missing dependencies like pandas can cause runtime errors when executing functions that require them.
    - Solution: Ensure all necessary dependencies are installed in the environment where the client operates. Use virtual environments to manage dependencies cleanly.

- **Compatibility with Databricks Connect**

    - Pitfall: Using incompatible versions of databricks-connect can lead to execution failures, especially with serverless compute.

>     - Solution: Install the specific version of databricks-connect that is supported (15.1.0 or higher) to ensure compatibility with serverless features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Solution: Install the specific version of databricks-connect that is supported (15.1.0) to ensure compatibility with serverless features.
```

#### Example Usage of the Client

``` python
from ucai.core.databricks import DatabricksFunctionClient

# Initialize the client using serverless
client = DatabricksFunctionClient()

# Define your catalog and schema
CATALOG = "my_catalog"
SCHEMA = "my_schema"

> 

Reviewer: I think we can remove this part, as the client is defined above

# Verify client setup by listing existing functions
functions = client.list_functions(catalog=CATALOG, schema=SCHEMA)
for func in functions.items:
    print(func.full_name)
```

## Creating Functions

### Using a Python Callable

#### How the `create_python_function` API Works

The `create_python_function` API in Unity Catalog AI provides a way to create Unity Catalog functions (UDFs) from Python functions, while ensuring compatibility with SQL environments. Here’s a comprehensive guide explaining how it works, what is required, and what is not allowed when using this API.

##### Key Concepts

- **Type Hint Requirements**
    - All Python functions passed to `create_python_function` must have explicit type hints for both parameters and return values. These type hints are used to determine the corresponding SQL data types for the UC function.
    - If type hints are missing, the function will not be accepted.
   
- **Supported Python to SQL Type Mapping**
    - `int` → `LONG`
    - `float` → `DOUBLE`
    - `str` → `STRING`
    - `bool` → `BOOLEAN`

>     - `Decimal` → `DECIMAL(38,18)` (with default precision and scale)

Reviewer: I thought default is Decimal(10, 0) https://docs.databricks.com/en/sql/language-manual/data-types/decimal-type.html#syntax

Author: ah I forgot about that. We can't use the default though since it's lossy for large values. I map to the max scale to avoid truncation / rounding issues.

- **Return Type**

    - The Python function **must** specify a valid return type. If no return type is provided, the function creation will fail.
    - Similar to input types, return types are also mapped from Python to SQL according to the compatibility matrix.

- **Function Replacement**

By default, if a function with the same name already exists in the target catalog and schema, the creation will fail. To replace an existing function, use the `replace=True` argument in the `create_python_function` API call.

- **External Dependencies**

The execution environment within a SQL Warehouse has limited access to Python libraries. Ensure that you have verified that your function is capable of being
executed prior to proceeding with using it in a GenAI solution to reduce the amount of troubleshooting you may have to do.

### Using a SQL body statement

An alternative to using the `create_python_function` API is to use the `create_function` API. This method requires you to submit the full SQL body for the function
creation manually.

> For example:

Reviewer: This is duplicate from client.md, maybe we just link to it?

    - Solution: Ensure that the function name follows the catalog.schema.function_name format without special characters that are not allowed.

- **Parameter and Return Types**

    - Pitfall: Using incompatible types between Python and SQL can cause execution failures.
    - Solution: Align your SQL function's parameter and return types with the supported types outlined in the Type Compatibility Matrix below.

- **Handling Reserved Keywords**

    - Pitfall: Using SQL reserved keywords as function or parameter names can result in syntax errors.
    - Solution: Avoid using reserved keywords or properly escape them using backticks if necessary.

- **Permissions and Access Control**

    - Pitfall: Insufficient permissions can prevent function creation or execution.
    - Solution: Ensure that the user account initializing the DatabricksFunctionClient has the necessary permissions to create and manage functions within the specified catalog and schema.

- **Function Overwriting**

    - Pitfall: Attempting to create a function that already exists without specifying the replace parameter can fail.

>     - Solution: Include OR REPLACE in your SQL statement if you intend to overwrite an existing function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Solution: Include `OR REPLACE` in your SQL statement if you intend to overwrite an existing function.
```

|--------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `int`                    | `LONG`                      | Represents large integer values.                                            |
| `float`                  | `DOUBLE`                    | Represents double-precision floating-point values.                          |
| `str`                    | `STRING`                    | Represents variable-length string data.                                     |
| `bool`                   | `BOOLEAN`                   | Represents boolean values (`True`/`False`).                                 |
| `datetime.date`          | `DATE`                      | Represents date values (year, month, day).                                  |
| `datetime.datetime`      | `TIMESTAMP`                 | Represents timestamp values (date and time).                                |
| `datetime.timedelta`     | `INTERVAL DAY TO SECOND`    | Represents intervals (difference between two timestamps).                   |

> | `decimal.Decimal`        | `DECIMAL(38, 18)`           | Represents fixed-point decimal values with default precision and scale.     |

Reviewer: Let's link line 87 here instead of duplicating it twice?

Author: I simply forgot to delete this placeholder :)
